When I arrived in Jordan,
There were many feelings inside of me.
It's my first parish, it had been about 80 years since they didn't have a resident priest here...
There are no facilities, let's say, like a market square,
Although it is a municipality, we have a health center, not a hospital.
It is an economically poor parish.
The arrival in Jordan was very difficult.
Adapting in the first few days was very difficult for me, it brought tears.
Here, there is this belief of a curse, many say there is a curse
from a priest who cursed the town.
Well, I'm not apathetic to those things.
But I don't focus on that too much.
In fewer words, one cannot let oneself be deceived
by something that I don't know if it's true or not.
Holy Mary, mother of God,
pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death.
Amen.
I visited Jordan in 2014.
In that year, I got to know this town.
And one of the first things they showed us was the cemetery.
When I arrived here and saw the cemetery like this,
the chapel had not collapsed yet.
The tombs are very old.
It already looked bad.
Well.
And that day, we came, looked, and like everyone else,
We walked around and left.
But it raised a question for me.
Why doesn't a priest or an administration
get involved in this before it collapses?
He died in April, on April 9th,
of 1919.
On December 12, 2020,
the bishop called me
and asked me to take over this as a parish.
Take this on.
Take Jordán.
And as soon as he said "Take Jordán,"
I thought,
"oh, the cemetery!"
the parish priest who has to fix it,
maybe it's me.
Honestly, I was very scared.
Some people said,
"That cannot be rebuilt with 500 million pesos."
Some people held raffles
and there were $2,673,000 pesos.
That wasn't enough for anything.
Where will they get resources
for that project?
Where will I get it from?
1 pound of dry rice.
Do you have soup rice?
Yes, sir.
Give me 1 pound of soup rice.
Give me 1 pound of promasa also.
How much is it?
$46,300.
At first, I visited the families I could,
because I haven't visited them all.
Well, excuse me.
Go ahead, Father.
It hasn't been too hard for me,
because I perfectly understand the rural reality.
If it doesn't connect through the spiritual or religious life,
it connects because there's a common issue,
which is rural life.
To sit perhaps on the old stool they have,
Have your cup of black coffee that they offer or your glass of lemonade in a glass that might have a crack.
And that gesture of arriving at a house and greeting them.
My potato.
My pea.
They didn't have coffins,
so the next day someone comes and takes them and wrap them up in
plastic or something like that.
And they threw it
Really?
Yes.
Yes, that's how the morgue was.
It's very sad.
I mean, now it's the second version I hear of that,
because Manuel, well,
Manuel, who owns the farm there,
where the cemetery is now:
Manuelito Sarmiento once told me,
"here,
they left the dead there for three, four days,
sometimes even more."
Yes, that's not a lie.
But then I, well,
I thought to myself, I should ask
why now you're telling me,
was there a communal coffin there?
Yes, that coffin, I don't know where they took it,
well, they did take it.
I want to know,
do you remember where your parents were buried?
over there, look, let´s walk and I'll show you where
It doesn't have a name anymore.
Yes.
You can still see something on this side.
Because he told me that
my mom had to be buried
next to him.
For example, this one, that one,
that one down there,
do those graves remain?
Yes.
Because that is, I mean, for history,
how they used to build a tomb before,
how they made them, right?
What model did they use?
Yes.
Those are the goats that I have.
I'll donate whichever one you choose
for the raffle.
I would recommend you choose
that one there, the bigger one.
And I'll donate it, Father.
Alright, thank you very much, Mrs. Magaly.
So, how much would we estimate
the value of that goat?
300 thousand pesos, Father.
300 thousand pesos, alright.
So, it's to let people know
"you won the goat or if you don't want the goat,
you win 300 thousand pesos in cash."
When will you come by Jordan?
I just felt like calling you,
to greet you.
And what?
And what? And your parish? The Maria Auxiliadora?
Come.
Come, let's talk one day, Wednesday.
Wednesday and Thursday.
Yes.
Sometimes I feel bored here
like something dull, damn it.
That's why sometimes, you know...
Well, I don't know.
Sometimes one has moments of joy,
but also sometimes moments
of sadness, of nonsense,
because one...
Well, I don't know.
In this mess, one feels alone.
Sometimes, you know?
But...
Yes.
And sometimes I'm afraid to say
like...
Change, because when I asked for change
in Charalá, look...
Jordán, it's been tough for me,
but I love Jordán.
I love it very much.
And that's why I've made an effort,
That's why I've burned the midnight oil.
And that's why I ask my God
that while I'm here,
he gives me good health
to keep working.
Because I feel
that this is an unexplored matter.
There, there.
Don’t you have a nail?
Don't throw away the nail
because otherwise, you won’t be able to….
Don’t you have a nail?
Yes, yes- Father.
Yes, that. Otherwise, you can't break it there
because you have to make a small cut there with that one.
...We invite you to enjoy
a delicious "mute".
Grilled meat,
empanadas,
verdines (dish made with beans),
beers
and soda.
The funds raised
will go towards
the construction of the cemetery vault.
I
am not a big fan of parties.
First of all, if I,
if I were to say, if one day I could
raise resources in another way,
I would do it.
What I'm doing here is crazy.
Maybe this isn't so religious.
Maybe this isn't so spiritual.
Why did I get myself into this?
Give me more, give me more.
What’s up, Father?
Good! Just working around here
Great.
God bless you. May He protect you from all evi.
Well, thank you very much.
Good.
Good luck father.
Likewise.
Good afternoon.
We offer you the chicken raffle.
$3000 per ticket, two for $5000, so...
Yes, and put them here.
Hello, hello.
Well, good morning.
We welcome each and every one of you to this celebration
of the patron saint festival of Santa Rosa de Lima.
I want to request a big round of applause for our parish priest,
a big round of applause that can be heard over there,
for putting in the effort for this activity.
Father, congratulations.
And on behalf of the community,
we also place you in the hands of Almighty God
so that you may continue with this important work.
Hernán, I'll pay you for these three "mutes", two meats, and a chicken.
I'll pay in a moment, I'll pay in a moment.
Father, but this is missing in the plate
Zuli, Zuli, do me a favor, tell the firefighters to come to the stand to pick up their lunch.
Yes, but now, now.
Well, we continue to offer the chicken raffle, one ticket for three thousand, two for five thousand.
So, this is from the empanadas funds.
One hundred, one hundred fifty, four hundred fifty.
You guys enjoy your eggs, right?